https://fr.wikisource.org/wiki/La_Loi_(Fr%C3%A9d%C3%A9ric_Bastiat)

# The Law

The law perverted! The law -- and behind it all the collective powers
of the nation, -- the Law, I say, not merely turned from its end, but
made to pursue an end directly opposite! The Law become tool of all
the cupidities, instead of their brake! The Law itself achieving the
iniquity it had the mission to punish! Surely here is a grave fact, if
it is true, to which I should be permitted to call the attention of my
fellow citizens.

We hold from God the gift which for us encompasses all, Life --
physical, intellectual, and moral life.

But life is not sustained by itself. He who gave it to us left to us
the care of maintaining, developing, and perfecting it.

For this, he provided us an ensemble of marvelous Faculties; he
plunged us into the midst of diverse elements. It's by applying our
faculties to these elements that is realized the phenomenon of
*Assimilation*, of *Appropriation*, by which life runs around the
circle it has been assigned.

Existence, Faculties, Assimilation -- in other terms, Personality,
Liberty, Property -- this is man.

`XXX translate to nonsexist while we're at it?`

It's of these three things that we can say, outside of all demagogic
subtlety, that they are before and above all human legislation.

It's not because men have proclaimed Laws that Personality, Liberty,
and Property exist. To the contrary, it's because of preexisting
Personality, Liberty, and Property that men make Laws.

What then is the Law? As I've said elsewhere, it is the collective
organization of the individual Right of legitimate defense.

. . .

It must be said: there are too many great men in the world; there are
too many legislators, organizers, institutors of societies, conductors of
peoples, fathers of nations, etc. Too many persons place themselves
above humanity to rule it, too many make a profession of minding it.

Someone will say to me: you are minding humanity yourself, you who
speak. It's true. But it will be admitted this is in a quite different
sense and point of view, and if I mix with the reformers it's only to
make them let go.

I mind it not like Vaucanson, of his automaton, but like a
physiologist of the human organism: to study and admire it.

I mind it in the spirit that animates a famous traveler.

He arrives among a wild tribe. A child has just been born and a crowd
of diviners, sorcerers, and empirics surrounds him, armed with rings,
hooks, and bonds. One says: this child will never smell the scent of a
peace pipe, unless I stretch his nostrils. Another: he will lack the
sense of hearing, unless I draw his ears down to his shoulders. A
third: he'll never see the sunshine unless I give to his eyes a
slant. A fourth: he'll never stand up unless I bend his legs. A fifth:
he'll never think unless I squeeze his brain. Stand back, says the
traveler. God made well what he did; don't pretend to know more than
he, and since he has given organs to this frail creature, let them
develop and strengthen by exercise, groping, experience, and Liberty.

God has placed in humanity, too, all it needs to achieve its
destinies. There is a providential social physiology as there is a
providential human physiology. The social organs as well are
constituted to develop harmoniously in the great air of Liberty. Stand
back, then, empirics and organizers! Back, their rings, chains, hooks,
pincers! Back, their artificial means! Back, their social workshop,
their commune, their governmentalism, their centralization, their
tariffs, their universities, their religions of the State, their
free-of-charge banks or their bank monopolies, their compressions,
their restrictions, their moralization, their equalization by tax! And
since we've vainly inflicted on the social body so many systems, let
us end where we should have begun, let us rebuff the systems, let us
finally try Liberty -- Liberty, an act of faith in God and in his
work.
