https://fr.wikisource.org/wiki/L%E2%80%99Autre_monde_ou_les_%C3%89tats_et_empires_de_la_Lune

# The Other World

## 1. The states and empires of the moon

The moon was full, the sky clear, and the ninth hour of the night had
been sounded, when, returning from Clamard near Paris (where Monsieur
de Cuigy the younger, who is lord there, had feasted several of my
friends and me), the various thoughts given us by this saffron ball
engaged us in conversation along the way: since our eyes were drowning
in this great Star, now one of us took it for a window on Heaven by
which we glimpsed the glory of the blessed; now another, persuaded by
ancient fables, imagined that Bacchus might run a tavern up there in
Heaven, hanging the full moon there as ensign; now another claimed it
was the plate whereon Diana minds Apollo's ties; another that it could
well be the Sun himself, shaved at night of his rays, peeking through
a hole at what went on in the world in his absence. "And I," I told
them, "who wish to mix my enthusiasms with yours, I believe without
amusing myself with the fevered imaginations by which you tickle Time
to pass more quickly, that the Moon is a world like ours, to whom our
own serves as Moon." Some of the company regaled me with a great clap
of laughter. "And so perhaps," I said, "is someone else being mocked
now on the Moon, who maintains that this globe here is a world." But
were I to allege to them that Pythagoras, Epicurus, Democritus, and,
in our age, Copernicus and Kepler, held this opinion, I would only
oblige them to laugh the harder.
