https://fr.wikisource.org/wiki/Essai_philosophique_sur_les_probabilit%C3%A9s

Every event, even those that by their minuteness seem not to hold to
the great laws of nature, follow them as necessarily as the
revolutions of the Sun. In our ignorance of the links that unite them
to the whole system of the universe, we made them depend on final
causes, or chance, by which they would occur and succeed each other
with regularity, or without apparent order; but these imaginary causes
successively retreated with the borders of our knowledge, and would
disappear wholly before the healthy philosophy which sees in them
only the expression of the ignorance actually caused by ourselves.

Present events have, with preceding ones, a link founded on the
evident principle that one thing cannot begin to be without a cause
producing it. This axiom, known by the name of the *principle of
sufficient reason*, reaches even the actions we judge indifferent. The
freest will cannot, without a determining motive, give them birth; for
if, all the circumstances of two locations being exactly similar, it
were to act in one and refrain in the other, its choice would be an
effect without cause: it would then be, says Leibniz, the blind chance
of the Epicureans. The contrary opinion is an illusion of the mind
which, losing from view the fugitive reasons for the choice of the
will in indifferent things, is persuaded it determines itself by
itself and without motives.

So we ought to envisage the present state of the universe as the
effect of its previous state, and the cause of the next. An
intelligence who, at a given instant, were to know all the forces that
animate nature, and the respective situation of the beings composing
it, and further should be vast enough to subject this data to
analysis, would encompass in the same formula the movements of the
greatest bodies in the universe and the lightest atom: nothing would
be uncertain to it, and the future, like the past, would be present to
its eyes. The human mind offers, in the perfection it has been able to
give Astronomy, a feeble sketch of this intelligence. Its discoveries
in Mechanics and Geometry, along with that of universal gravity, have
set it in reach to comprehend in the same analytic expressions the
states past and future of the system of the world. In applying the
same method to some other objects of its knowledge, it succeeded in
ramifying into general laws the observed phenomena, and in foreseeing
which of the given circumstances should hatch. All these efforts in
the search for truth tend ceaselessly towards the intelligence we just
conceived, which will always remain infinitely distant. This tendency,
native to the human species, is what places it above the animals; and
its progress of this kind distinguishes nations and centuries, and
makes their true glory.

Recall that of yore, not so long ago, a rain or a drought, a comet
dragging a long-extended tail, the aurora borealis, and in general all
extraordinary phenomena, were seen as so many signs of heavenly anger.
We invoked the heavens to turn away their evil influence. We prayed
not at all to suspend the course of the planets and the Sun:
observation had quickly made felt the vanity of these prayers. But as
these phenomena appeared and vanished at long intervals, seeming to
oppose the order of nature, we supposed heaven, vexed by our earthly
crimes, gave birth to them to announce its revenges. Thus the long
tail of the comet of 1456 spread terror in a Europe already upset by
the rapid successes of the Turks who had just thrown down the Low
Empire. This star, after four of its revolutions, excited among us a
quite different interest. The knowledge of the laws of the system of
the world, gained in this interval, had dispelled the childish fears
due to ignorance of the true setting of man in the universe; and Halley,
having recognized the identity of this comet with those of 1531, 1607,
and 1682, announced its next return for the end of 1758 or the start
of 1759. The world awaited, with impatience, this return that ought to
confirm one of the greatest discoveries ever made in the sciences, and
fulfil the prediction of Seneca, when he said of the revolution of
those stars which descend from a vast distance: "The day will come
when, by a study pursued over many centuries, things currently hidden
will seem evident; and posterity will marvel that such clear truths
escaped us." Clairaut undertook then to subject to analysis the
perturbations the comet had felt by the action of the two largest
planets, Jupiter and Saturn; after immense calculations he fixed its
next passage to perihelion at the start of April 1759, which
observation did not take long to confirm. The regularity shown us by
Astronomy in the movement of comets has place, no doubt, in all
phenomena. The curve described by a simple molecule of air or of
vapors is ruled in a manner as certain as the planetary orbits: there
are no differences between them but those of our ignorance.

Probability is relative in part to this ignorance, in part to our
knowledge. We know that among three or a greater number of events, one
must happen; but nothing brings us to think that one will rather than
the others. In this state of indecision, it is impossible for us to
pronounce with certainty about their occurrence. It is, however, probable
that one of these events, taken at will, will not happen, because we
see many cases equally possible which exclude its occurrence, while
favoring only one.

The theory of chance consists in reducing all the events of the same
kind to a certain number of cases all equally possible, meaning such
that we are equally undecided about their occurrence; and to determine
the number of cases favorable to the event whose probability we
seek. The proportion of this number to that of all possible cases is
the measure of this probability, which thus is simply a fraction whose
numerator counts the favorable cases and whose denominator counts the
possible.

